---
title: One Year Self Employed
date: 2022-11-22
tags: entrepreneurship,freelancing,personal
---

On November 22nd, 2021, I lost my job. I had been weighing if I should
leave for some time, and having the choice made for me was freeing in
some ways. I tend to stay places too long, trying to effect change long
after it becomes clear how large a fight those changes might take. The
broad strokes of what I should do next were pretty clear to me, but the
specifics of how to turn it into a business that generates revenue
weren't. It's been about a year, and I haven't done a good job of
broadcasting what I've been working on.

I've been one of the leaders of Reactiflux for the entire time it's been
on Discord, 7 years. It grew without much help, by virtue of being one
of the only chat communities focused on React. By our metrics, I know
that we have on the order of 3,500 monthly active members, with peak
online averaging around 15,000 members.

This large number of active members, asking questions and helping each
other, has always been operated by volunteers and adjacent to a number
of commercial interests. We've had an active job board for year with
people hiring through the community, we've brought on guests to talk
about new developments in technology or to discuss new products.

As I was figuring out what I wanted to do after losing my job, I
reflected on a lot of the projects ideas I'd considered; operating the
community in a more professional way and developing it into a
self-sustaining operation, rather than an engine kept running purely
through goodwill. As a mature community, though, it's been important to
me to keep the spirit alive; it's no good to anyone if Reactiflux loses
what makes it great.

I've spent the past year spending my work energy on self-employment and
building the life that I want. Through my last long-term employment, I
made enough money to seriously contemplate how much I would need to do
_what I want_. A prerequisite question to answer, though, is what _do_ I
want?

I've always known that I've wanted to work for myself. When I was young,
my mom shared a story that entered the canon of my life, of my dad
coming home from work one day and telling her, "I can't work for other
people anymore." He went on to found a manufacturing business that he
operated until he passed away.

I lost my job at the close of a transformative period of my life. I
spent the majority of 2021, my 30th year on earth, living nomadically;
staying in long-stay rentals, camping in national parks, staying with
friends and family, and generally roaming the country. I drove 23,000
miles in 2021, hiked dozens of miles (which included at least one moment
of genuine mortal peril), and totally changed how I live my life.
Professionally, I had intended to return to a semblance of how I lived
before before, determined to make the best at a company I felt was doing
good and important work, but instead I found myself untethered and free
to pursue self-directed goals. Personally, I made a deliberate and
intentional move away from polyamorous relationships, which I'd been
involved in since 2018.

The past year has continued to be transformative for me. I set some
optimistic goals for myself — many of which fell to the realities of
life on the road — and made progress that I'm proud of, learning a
tremendous amount about the spaces I'd like to invest more deeply in. I
hosted and guested events. I broadened my knowledge of investment
portfolios, through needing to adequately manage my own. I obtained my
first consulting gig, made significant progress on developing a slate of
software products, and formed a corporate structure to support my
ongoing work. I've connected with dozens of people doing good work
around the world, and have developed a much clearer picture of what
sorts of revenue streams might be sustainable. I put an offer on a house
in an area I'm excited to live in, financed through an uncommon
mechanism (shoutout to SBLoCs). I spent several months exploring the
east coast of the US, and several weeks exploring Europe for the first
time in 10 years. I've begun building a life with a partner I love.

By foregoing full-time employment, I've had time to and need of living
my life with more intentionality. It's not enough to go through the
motions; I have to proactively plan and execute on short-term goals at
every step. It's been exhausting at times, like visiting 5 countries in
Europe in 10 days or scraping together 3 weeks of housing at the last
minute after rentals fell through. But it's also been freeing and
exhilarating, giving me the freedom to consider what I'm good at, what I
want to do, and how I could use that to make money.

I've explored a number of ways of making money to support myself, but
still have a long list of topics. I'm consulting and developing my
professional network. I'm building products to solve problem I encounter
in the consulting and community management work I do. I'm looking at
ways to operate events in a way that isn't too draining to be
sustainable. My partner and I are drafting an outline for a book. I've
laid some groundwork for a paid job board and referral network.

I intentionally didn't go "all-in" on any of these ideas; while I
haven't struck gold yet, I have a large number of viable-sounding
concepts to explore while part-time consulting pays my bills. I consider
the past year as time spent investing in personal and professional
growth and development; after nearly 10 years working as a software
engineer, I knew there would be an adjustment period as I transitioned
to freelancing and entrepreneurship. There's still a long road ahead,
but I'm really excited to walk it.
