---
title: Bike stories
date: 2024-02-15
tags: personal stories
---

# A collection of bike stories.

I used to bike 20 miles a day in high school. I'd bike to school, for
exercise, to see how fast I could go, because I was bored, because I
needed to bike out some strong emotions. I biked over most of the
streets in my hometown of Ann Arbor, mostly before they installed
cycling infrastructure.

I'm pretty sure I've hurt myself most ways it's possible to, with
varying severities of incident and injury (up to and including being hit
by a car). Most of these have been pretty minor, I've never been
admitted to a hospital as a result, though I once was pretty sure I
broke an arm and I got checked out for a concussion after being hit by a
car.

Now, as an adult, I occasionally find myself biking through Manhattan.
That's been a risky endeavor, which has led me to reflect on the
instincts I've developed to keep myself safe, and how hard-won some of
those experiences were. I haven't thought about a lot of these stories
in years, so I thought I'd put pen to page and capture them as I best
recall.

# Bad dismount

In my late teens, I was biking up Main St near the UM Football Stadium
(largest in the world). They had just repainted the sidewalk, and I was
riding top speed with no
[handlebars](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HLUX0y4EptA) (a recurring
theme) and distracted by a police stop. I glance forward just in time to
see that the crosswalk lines don't lead to the curb cut, but directly
into a 4-6" newly-poured curb. I don't recall if I got my hands back on
the bars, but it didn't matter because I had no time to brake.

This was one of my worst falls. I went fully over the handlebars with a
twist, landing flat on my ass and doing a full backwards somersault. I
jarred my elbow and gotten some scraptes, but was otherwise fine. I
biked home cradling my arm, wondering if I might have broken it. It was
sore for a couple days, but cleared up on its own. I might have been 16
or 17. I don't wear a helmet, which wasn't a factor in this fall.

Lessons to be learned:

- Don't trust the infrastructure
- Pay attention
- Pay attention, idiot

## Crosswalk fakeout

I had a 10-20 mile route through the city that I'd do quite frequently,
varying the route based on my energy and available time to tune the
distance. It almost always, though, included a stretch from a shopping
center near the highway into downtown, one that goes through a small
valley with very narrow lanes, high vehicle speeds, and a lot of
traffic. In the years since, I've read about numerous bicylist deaths on
this stretch.

So, I was riding on the sidewalk. It was one of my first times riding
this route, and my first time on this side of the street. I had just
gotten a soda, and was riding no handed while drinking it, as the route
was a straight line with clear sightlines on turning cars. Suddenly, I
spot that the crosswalk ahead of me doglegs sharply left exactly 1
sidewalk width. The path straight is worn dirt, gravel, and a beaten up
shallow curb.

I violently bump and jostle my way over the first bump, barely touching
the handlebars and dropping my soda. One of my feet slips off the pedal,
and I slightly overextend something in my ankle while I regain control.
I manage to stay upright, though, bumping less violently over the other
end of the crosswalk. Not a major injury, but I stopped riding on that
side of the street (or, at least, I'd be prepared to ramp off the curb
when necessary). I don't wear a helmet, which wasn't a factor in this
fall.

Lessons to be learned:

- Don't trust the infrastructure
- Pay attention

## Not for bikes

I had another unexpected curb while biking out of the edge of town, out
past a gas station on State Street near the airport. I was biking
flat-out, maximum effort on a wide smooth asphalt path, which on a good
day I could top out near 30mph. Midway across a driveway, I spy that the
far side has no curb cut, it's a solid 6" curb.

I slam the brakes and lock the rear tire. The front tire has far, far
more braking power (that's how people flip, over-applying the front
brake with too much forward lean), but is tricker to emergency brake on
without dumping the bike. And anyway, I needed that hand for something
else; I'm pretty good at bunny hops, and thought I had a chance to clear
it with my speed.

I grab a fistful of brake and balance on the locked rear wheel, leaving
a good dozen feet of rubber track before I let go and jump. I did
actually clear the front wheel, but the rear took a hard impact right on
the curb, hard enough to crack the aluminum rim. I think I still have it
in a closet; cracked, dented in close to an inch, and badly out of true.
I can't have been older than 16, because I remember calling my first
high school girlfriend while waiting for my mom to pick me up. I don't
wear a helmet, which wasn't a factor in this fall.

Lessons to be learned:

- Scope out a route before going maximum effort
- Don't trust the infrastructure

## Surprise stairs

The west edge of downtown Ann Arbor has a short but somewhat steep hill,
which (I learned) was steep enough to merit 2 stairs into a crosswalk.
As is my custom, I was barreling along top speed when I made this
discovery, suddenly finding myself 18 inches off the ground at close to
20 mph. Fortunately, in the midst of laying on the power, I was in a
good position to react to unexpected conditions and landed not much
worse for wear. (Okay, this isn't really an injury story, but it easily
could have been). I don't wear a helmet, which wasn't a factor.

Lessons to be learned:

- Don't trust the infrastructure

## Blind corners, biking angry

I was about 22, working at my first startup, and it was the bad days.
The team collapsed a few weeks later, and the company folded not long
thereafter. I had just had one of an escalating series of fights with
the cofounder, and I needed to bike about it. I drag my bike out of the
office and start riding flat out, choosing physical stress to override
my emotional stress. As I biked out of the office, I remember thinking
"if there's a car here, I won't be able to react" due to a completely
blind corner.

Sure enough. In fact, 3 of the 6 of us in the office ended up being hit
by a car at this intersection over the summer. My glasses were knocked
off, I lost one of my shoes, and my bike frame was bent, but generally
rideable. This was the most damaging and highest-risk of any of my
falls, but I was relatively unhurt. I got checked for a concussion to be
safe (clear), but otherwise didn't suffer any ill effects. I did need to
replace my bike (fun fact: this badly damaged bike was later stolen and
subsequently returned, I presume because it was worthless). I don't wear
a helmet, which wasn't a factor in this fall — it was a near miss,
though.

Lessons to be learned:

- Don't trust the infrastructure
- Don't ride (too) angry

## Wet asphalt

This is one of the most trivial of my falls, and yet the one where I
most badly hurt myself. It was shortly after a rain on fresh (< 6 months
old) asphalt; nice and smooth. I'm riding home from downtown, north on
Plymouth just after the bridge, guard lowered entirely. I suddenly found
my chin on the pavement and my handlebar jammed into my thigh. My
off-road tires lost traction in an instant on the wet, smooth path, and
I went down hard before I realized what happened.

Bleeding from my chin and limping from a muscle bruise on my leg, I
walked the remaining ~2 miles home (stopping to clean myself up in a
bathroom along the way). I was probably 15, I still remember coming in
and seeing my mom's face go white when she saw me bleeding. "I fell." I
don't wear a helmet, which wasn't a factor in this fall — I'd have
needed to be wearing a full-face helmet, like for motorcycles or
off-roading, to avoid an injury.

Lessons to be learned:

- Be extra wary in wet conditions

## Downtown BMX

There was a really zany path going up Jackson road, heading from
Westland into downtown. It's a gentle downhill for a over half a mile,
with a tight sidewalk, a busy 2-lane road on 1 side and close-cropped
hedges, fences, and walls on the other. Very few people walk this route,
and over time (this was on the tail end of my 20mi route, so I ended up
here frequently) I began to treat it like a personal BMX course. The
downhill made it easy to maintain a high speed, even while tired, and
the bumps served very well as obstacles and ramps.

I actually never hurt myself or had any close calls, but it was so
unsafe in hindsight. The driveways were blind and narrow, with
possibility for mixed car and pedestrian traffic. Absolutely not a place
for the speeds I would hit. (no ragrets)

Lessons to be learned:

- ???
