---
title: Buying a home in Brooklyn
date: 2022-10-06
description:
  The real estate market in NYC and the surrounding area is like nothing
  else in the country.
tags: personal finance,real estate
---

# Buying a home in NYC

NYC real estate is unique. Throw out everything you've heard about
buying a house, and ignore anyone who hasn't specifically researched
what the process is like for NYC. Even other major cities (such as SF,
LA, Denver, or Seattle) are not comparable because of how long the NYC
market has existed with its current level of density. Townhouses and
condos may have some overlap with other parts of the country, but still
have additional quirks, and co-ops are rare outside of NYC.

I had the luxury of buying a house during one of the slowest markets in
recent history, mainly searching between July and September 2022. I was
also searching at the fringes, on the outskirts of what a lot of people
would consider "in the city" (Brooklyn, south of Prospect Park) and on
the absolute low end of the market. As a data point, my price ceiling
was \$450,000; a figure most would figure is impossible to find in NYC.
But I found one! In my search, I toured a a good dozen properties in my
price range, and ultimately made an offer well below my max budget.

BrickUnderground and Brownstoner are great resources, with good
[overviews of what to expect](https://www.brickunderground.com/guides/how-to-buy/an-overview).

Broadly, there are several phases to a serious search:

- Research
- Neighborhood selection
- Home selection
- Touring and submitting an offer
- Closing
  - Submitting an offer
  - Completing a deal sheet
  - Due diligence and board interview
  - Final Closing

Don't underestimate the research needed to make an informed decision on
what home to buy. These are my notes, collated into a form that I hope
will be helpful to anyone who stumbles across them, compiled after
seriously searching for about a year as my finances and criteria
settled.

Zillow, Trulia, and Redfin might be great in the rest of the country,
but they aren't set up for the NYC market. StreetEasy is among the best
options for NYC, with accurate data and good search controls (like
filtering to be near a specific line). You can save searches (and find
them later in "My Activity") to get notifications of new listings coming
on the market. Do this months before you intend to buy so you can get a
sense for how the market is moving and how quickly you'll have to jump
on a home you love.

Despite being among the best, the notification options for StreetEasy
are still pretty garbage. It took me a while to figure out the UI well
enough to get the kinds of notifications I wanted, and there was still a
lot of noise to sort through. The approach I found most effective was to
draw a custom search area with a max price about 20% above what I was
comfortable paying, and then pay close attention to how the market flows
in that area.

If the market is particularly hot, scout around for a real estate agent
who will stay on the ball for you. However after talking with several
agents, telling them my criteria, and receiving email updates with new
homes from them, I found that I could more quickly find new homes with a
well-crafted set of StreetEasy search notifications. I heard that agents
can sometimes find homes before they get onto the market, but I didn't
find any homes that way.

I found an unusual source of information to be absolutely essential:
[The Department of Buildings records search](https://a810-bisweb.nyc.gov/bisweb/bsqpm01.jsp).
You can search for any address in the city and pull up a list of permits
and complaints. Because I was trying hard to keep my budget as low as
possible, I found a lot of buildings that seemed too good to be true.
Permit and complaint records helped me find reasons for low prices, like
a building fire 8 years before, a collapsed ceiling due to un-permitted
bathroom renovation, frequently out-of-service elevators, and other
issues. The Department of Buildings is serious in NYC, everything is so
close together that they don't fuck around. Once you figure out how to
navigate their records site, it has a wealth of valuable info.

One of the first major time investments you should make is to thoroughly
explore a neighborhood you think you'd like to live in to get a feel for
areas you think you may want to live. The NYC market moves quickly
enough that one of the best ways to make a purchase is to narrow your
scope into a specific neighborhood, block, or building, and get notified
when somewhere that interests you becomes available. It's much easier to
quickly evaluate a listing if you've spent a time in the neighborhood —
the neighborhood where you'll be living for years — so the more you can
learn about the area the better.

NYC housing markets are neighborhood specific. Access to transit, nearby
parks, type of building, and character of neighborhood, all vary
substantially in most parts of the city if you walk 10 minutes in any
direction, and these all have a major influence on prices. Where you can
afford is dependent on what you want to be proximal to and how much
space you need. The amount of variation in neighborhoods can work to
your advantage if you're willing to compromise a little; if a hip
neighborhood is out of your price range, you may be able to find
surprisingly affordable places within a 10 minute walk.

Since so much of NYC real estate goes through StreetEasy, one of the
easiest ways to find a real state agent is just by using their "contact
an expert" form. I did this several times for different properties to
get tours, and kept in touch with the agent I felt the best connection
with. I personally didn't find a ton of value in an agent before getting
to an offer stage. Open houses are frequent enough that it isn't
particularly difficult to tour the places you're interested in, but an
agent may be able to help you schedule a private tour.

There are 2 agents working any particular deal, the buyer's agent and
the seller's agent. You don't have an obligation to work with a
particular agent, but it's rude to move forward with a different agent
than the one that toured a home with you. I toured a lot of places I
didn't expect to move forward on to meet different agents, and then
reached out to one that I felt a connection with when I was ready to
make an offer. I took agent selection very seriously, since the buyer's
agent agent that closes the deal receives a percentage of the price as
their commission. I wanted to feel good about the service provided, but
also about who I'm choosing to win that commission.

Your agent's role is to help you get tours, find answers to questions
about the building, and connect you with other real estate
professionals. I found that I preferred being in charge of finding and
touring homes, since that's the most personal and time consuming aspect
of the search. Since I found that most homes are publicly available, I
felt able to discover and plan tours. Having an agent I trusted
available to help me schedule private tours if necessary was reassuring,
but ultimately I didn't make much use of that. I also didn't find an
agent the best source of information about a particular building or
unit. The seller's agent should have more information, I found it best
to ask them directly while touring.

While searching, in some areas of Brooklyn there were a good number of
"HDFC" buildings. HDFCs are "Housing Development Fund Corporations,"
which were most often formed in the 70s and 80s (TODO) as a means of
reclaiming and repairing abandoned residential buildings, turning them
into affordable housing. As they're intended to be affordable,
purchasing one comes with income restrictions; those restrictions made
them off-limits to me, so I didn't research them much beyond that. (A
funny quirk I noticed and asked around about: A portion of HDFC co-ops
don't allow financing, meaning that a low-income person or family must
pay cash, without obtaining a mortgage. I heard that it's a sign of
serious financial struggles, an indication that the building doesn't
want to allow a bank the access to their financial records a new
mortgage would require)

Submitting an offer is where I found the most value in having an agent.
My agent sent me a form asking for financial information and referred me
to several lawyers who could help me with the rest of the deal process.
The agent produced a "deal sheet" with the seller's agent, which gets
the ball rolling on due diligence. Lawyer will pull information from the
building (financial statements, board minutes, alteration and sublet
agreements), negotiate the sale contract, and explain all of the above
to you. I went with one recommended by my agent who charged a flat rate
on the order of \$3,000.

I was told to expect to spend \~3% of final price on closing costs for
an all-cash co-op purchase. Your agent commission comes out of the
purchase price and is not part of closing costs, which was a pleasant
surprise for me. That percentage gets higher if you're financing,
because the bank will have various fees around obtaining a mortgage
(separate from down payment), and higher still for a condo due to higher
building fees.
[BrickUnderground has some good background](https://www.brickunderground.com/blog/2015/03/closing_costs).

Manhattan property taxes are multiple times higher than in Brooklyn, on
the order of 0.5% vs 2.5%. Property taxes in Manhattan are quite high
compared to the rest of the US, but quite low compared to average in
Brooklyn. In a co-op, taxes are usually included in the maintenance
fees.

## Terminology

[Condos and co-ops](https://www.brownstoner.com/guides/apartment-home-types/condos-vs-co-ops/)
are both apartments, as compared to a single- or multi-family home. The
main difference is in how shared spaces and maintenance are operated.
The major tradeoff here is control vs responsibility; co-ops have more
control over how maintenance is performed, compared to a condo that's
operated by a management company. Co-ops are cooperatives that own the
entire building as a group, with no management companies involved.
Condos are owned by a management company, with "monthly maintenance"
being a charge from the company.

One of the downsides of a condo is that you won't have much control over
maintenance, and the company may decide that it needs to up its profit
margin.
[Private equity firms have been buying up these buildings](https://www.propublica.org/article/when-private-equity-becomes-your-landlord)
in some locations and upping the fees. However, co-ops may have deeply
entrenched co-op boards, and what control you're able to exert will
depend very heavily on the politics of the building.

Condos have higher closing costs than co-ops. Co-ops are usually more
restrictive on subletting policies, which generally makes them
unsuitable for investment properties.

Townhouses are generally single-family homes, which are uncommon in the
city and thus usually on the higher end of prices. Brownstones are a
type of townhouse with a characteristic building facade.

A "sponsor unit" is the term for a brand new property that is being sold
for the first time. Most sales are resales, though I was surprised at
the number of sponsor units I came across. I believe gut renovations may
be sold as sponsor units.

## Renovations

There are 3 major categories of work: DIY, cosmetic renovation, gut
renovation. Small things don't generally require a permit, but if it
touches plumbing or electrical, it's not a small thing. Changing layout
requires an architect to sign off on changes to make sure you don't
break the building, and if the layout affects how many people can live
in the unit, the Department of Buildings gets involved too.

Co-ops need board approval for all work done, full stop. Don't piss off
the co-op board, they control the building where you live. Renovations
in a co-op building are governed by the alteration agreement. There may
also be a decoration agreement governing smaller cosmetic alterations.

A major concern for co-op boards is work that "pierces the membrane" of
the building, i.e. that which would go from outside to inside the
building. This is one of the impediments to updating windows or
installing a mini-split system, as it a large condenser to be placed
outside the unit, generally on the roof. (other concerns include putting
something big and heavy on the roof)

Permits are important because a) there can be steep penalties, b) if
your neighbors feel you're putting the building at risk they _will_
report you. Housing units and building are all so closely positioned
that work without a permit presents a real risk to the surrounding area.
Your home flooding or burning because a neighbor skimped on required
checks sucks.
[Helpful process notes](https://www.brickunderground.com/guides/how-to-renovate/the-renovation-approval-process)

I inquired seriously about where the line is on DIY work, because I want
to do a lot of efficiency things like insulating and soundproofing the
walls. Online info I found indicated that you can open up the walls
without a permit as long as you aren't messing with plumbing and
electrical, but a large renovation project company I spoke with (\$300k
floor on project scope) said that if you open enough walls, it starts
looking like a gut renovation. Gut renovations require extensive
permitting, board approvals, and sign-offs from qualified professionals,
like structural engineers and architects.

Administrative Code
[section AC 28-105.4.2 defines minor alterations ](https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/buildings/apps/pdf_viewer/viewer.html?file=2014CC_AC_Chapter1_Administration.pdf&section=conscode_2014)and
ordinary repairs where a permit is not required.
